[Documentation] Added raw hid documentation page (#7640)
qmk/qmk_firmware: docs/feature_rawhid.md

# Raw HID

> Raw HID allows for bidirectional communication between keyboard and a host computer over HID interface. It allows for 32 byte bidirectional packet transfer in QMK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Raw HID allows for bidirectional communication between QMK and the host computer over an HID interface. This has many potential use cases, such as switching keymaps on the fly or changing RGB LED colors and modes.
```

The goal for Raw HID seems to be to implement variable length packets up to 64 bytes, so I think the current limitations should go instead in a caveats section.

Author: Good to see that's on the books. I was wondering about that.

There are two main components to getting raw HID working with your keyboard.

## Keyboard firmware

The implementation is fairly straightforward for the firmware.
In your `rules.mk` add:

```make
RAW_ENABLE = yes
```

In your `keymap.c` include `"raw_hid.h"` and implement the following:

```C
void raw_hid_receive(uint8_t *data, uint8_t length) {
    // Your code goes here. data is the packet received from host.
}
```

The `"raw_hid.h"` header also includes `void raw_hid_send(uint8_t *data, uint8_t length);`
which allows sending packets from keyboard to host. It can be used for debugging when building your host by returning all data back to host to test communication.

```C
void raw_hid_receive(uint8_t *data, uint8_t length) {
    raw_hid_send(data, length);
}
```

All Raw HID packets by default have size `RAW_EPSIZE` which is `32 bytes`, the actual length is determined by `uint8_t length` both when sending and receiving.

Make sure to flash raw enabled firmware before proceeding with working on the host side.

> ## Host (PC/Mac/Linux)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Host (Windows/macOS/Linux)
```

This is the more complicated part as it will require some digging.

To connect your host computer to your keyboard with raw HID you need four pieces of information about your keyboard:

1. Vendor ID
2. Product ID
3. Usage Page
4. Usage

The first two can easily be found in your keyboard's `config.h` in the keyboard's main directory under `VENDOR_ID` and `PRODUCT_ID`.

The second two are slightly harder and can vary by vendor. Most of the time though for most QMK keyboards **usage page is `0xFF60`** and **usage is `0x0061`**.

#### The harder way

> If these values don't work for you, you can easily discover the usage page and usage for your keyboard by finding the values for `tag 4` for usage page and `tag 8` for usage in the hid interface descriptor for your keyboard by using any form of hid dump or any hid library to find the descriptor and extract the values from the tags.

Reviewer: This information is mostly unnecessary. The usage page and usage must *always* be `0xFF60`/`0x61`.

Author: This doesn't happen to be the case for the HID interface for my board, md ctrl. Idk about raw hid because it's not implemented but for opening an HID interface I had to use `0xFF31` and `0x0074`, though I don't know if that will be the case for raw hid when it's implemented. But you know better, if it isn't needed let's remove it, just confirm that's the case.

Reviewer: Raw HID and Console are separate features. These are the descriptors for LUFA and ChibiOS:
https://github.com/qmk/qmk_firmware/blob/3eb82e047079230e55d3aeff901c4d0dce69fb3a/tmk_core/protocol/usb_descriptor.c#L233-L279
And for ATSAM (the formatting is a bit wonky, and the comments are a bit wrong):
https://github.com/qmk/qmk_firmware/blob/3eb82e047079230e55d3aeff901c4d0dce69fb3a/tmk_core/protocol/arm_atsam/usb/udi_hid_kbd.c#L638-L653
https://github.com/qmk/qmk_firmware/blob/3eb82e047079230e55d3aeff901c4d0dce69fb3a/tmk_core/protocol/arm_atsam/usb/udi_hid_kbd.c#L755-L772

Author: I know they're separate. I tested the interfaces in the descriptor and they came out wrong, regardless of the wrong comments, it just doesn't connect at all for any of the proper values according to the array index, they're not valid HID interfaces.

Author: Fixed. Still need to decide on which host implementation to present if any at all.

Reviewer: For all intents and purposes there is no ATSAM implementation right now - the descriptor is there and will be sent to the host when it requests it, but the functions in rawhid.h are never called.

> The easy way to do this for linux and mac users is to use teensy raw HID [host implementation](https://www.pjrc.com/teensy/rawhid.html "PJRC Teensy") to find the two tags' values. It is also recommended to use this host implementation as a starting point for your own host on any platform.

Reviewer: I would not recommend using the Teensy code anymore as it doesn't build OOB on macOS (the make config is outdated) and generally seems rather bitrotted now.

Author: yeah, it is quite old. We should present some skeleton host for testing purposes though. There is [this](https://github.com/rhruiz/hid_send) in C, and [this](https://github.com/BlankSourceCode/qmk-hid-display) with node-hid, this one is somewhat similar to the way VIA connects. Or, we could use the VIA code, refer to the specific file in the repo, but it's so not a skeleton.

Reviewer 2: I'd imagine documenting the APIs for the moment will suffice -- we can always open up a future PR for a skeleton app.

Author: Agreed. Let's get API documentation in and we can do implementation and client stuff later.

// simply refer to them by number
typedef struct hid_struct hid_t;
typedef struct buffer_struct buffer_t;
static hid_t *first_hid = NULL;
static hid_t *last_hid = NULL;
```

**TODO:** Find out the easiest way to get the values for these tags on windows.

Then make and run `raw_hidtest.c`. If you are on linux, ensure first you have the proper [udev rule](https://docs.qmk.fm/#/faq_build?id=linux-udev-rules).
You should get output similar to this:

```txt
device: vid=<Vendor ID>, pic=<Product ID>, with # iface
  type 3, 1, 1
  type 3, 1, 2
  type 3, 1, 0
  type 3, 0, 0
    OUT endpoint #
    IN endpoint #
  hid interface (generic)
  descriptor, len=32
  tag: 4, val #
  tag: 8, val #
  type 3, 0, 0
    OUT endpoint #
    IN endpoint #
  hid interface (generic)
  descriptor, len=32
  tag: 4, val <Usage Page>
  tag: 8, val <Usage>
```

Note that we are looking for the final two tag lines, the first two tag lines describe another interface that isn't used for HID. It's easy to figure out the correct tag lines as `tag: 4, val #` which determines the usage page will have an apparent hexadecimal address, usage line is the one immediately after. 

### Building your host

> You can build you host using any language that has an avialable HID implementation library if you don't wish to make your own. The ones we know of for popular languages are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can build your host using any language that has an available HID implementation library if you don't wish to make your own. The ones we know of for popular languages are:
```

* Node: [node-hid](https://github.com/node-hid/node-hid).
* C: [hidapi](https://github.com/signal11/hidapi).
* Java: [purejavahidapi](https://github.com/nyholku/purejavahidapi) and [hid4java](https://github.com/gary-rowe/hid4java).
* Python: [pyhidapi](https://pypi.org/project/hid/).

> This is not an exhaustive cross-platofrm list but should get you started. There are no special requirements for using raw HID so any HID library should work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is not an exhaustive cross-platform list but should get you started. There are no special requirements for using raw HID so any HID library should work.
```

# Raw HID

Raw HID allows for bidirectional communication between QMK and the host computer over an HID interface. This has many potential use cases, such as switching keymaps on the fly or changing RGB LED colors and modes.

There are two main components to getting raw HID working with your keyboard.

## Keyboard firmware

The implementation is fairly straightforward for the firmware.
In your `rules.mk` add:

```make
RAW_ENABLE = yes
```

In your `keymap.c` include `"raw_hid.h"` and implement the following:

```C
void raw_hid_receive(uint8_t *data, uint8_t length) {
    // Your code goes here. data is the packet received from host.
}
```

The `"raw_hid.h"` header also includes `void raw_hid_send(uint8_t *data, uint8_t length);`

> which allows sending packets from keyboard to host. It can also be used for debugging when building your host by returning all data back to host to test communication.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which allows sending packets from keyboard to host. As an example, it can also be used for debugging when building your host application by returning all data back to the host.
```

Reviewer 2: Should probably join the lines, too.

Author: Done

```C
void raw_hid_receive(uint8_t *data, uint8_t length) {
    raw_hid_send(data, length);
}
```

> All Raw HID packets by default have size `RAW_EPSIZE` which is `32 bytes`, the actual length is determined by `uint8_t length` both when sending and receiving.

Reviewer: This part is a little complex. When calling `raw_hid_send()` from QMK the packet and length *must* be 32 bytes, regardless of the actual message size.
https://github.com/qmk/qmk_firmware/blob/3eb82e047079230e55d3aeff901c4d0dce69fb3a/tmk_core/protocol/lufa/lufa.c#L143-L147
`raw_hid_receive()` however is able to take variable length messages up to 32 bytes.

The ATSAM code appears to set a `RAW_EPSIZE` of 64 bytes, which also seems possible on AVR, so I'd like to see that upped (though it may have to go through the breaking changes process - luckily we have a ton of boards running VIA to test 😄).

Author: Ok I updated that, not sure if it's we're quite there though. take a look.

1. Vendor ID
2. Product ID
3. Usage Page
4. Usage

The first two can easily be found in your keyboard's `config.h` in the keyboard's main directory under `VENDOR_ID` and `PRODUCT_ID`. **Usage Page** is **`0xFF60`** and **Usage** is **`0x0061`**.

### Building your host

The easy way to do this is to use teensy raw HID [host implementation](https://www.pjrc.com/teensy/rawhid.html "PJRC Teensy")

Download for your proper platform and extract the files. You'll need to go into `hid_<platform>.c` and enable logging by commenting out the first line in this block at the beginning of either file.
```
#define printf(...) // comment this out to get lots of info printed

// a list of all opened HID devices, so the caller can
// simply refer to them by number
typedef struct hid_struct hid_t;
typedef struct buffer_struct buffer_t;
static hid_t *first_hid = NULL;
static hid_t *last_hid = NULL;
```

You can build your host using any language that has an available HID implementation library if you don't wish to make your own. The ones we know of for popular languages are:

* Node: [node-hid](https://github.com/node-hid/node-hid).

> * C: [hidapi](https://github.com/signal11/hidapi).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* C: [hidapi](https://github.com/libusb/hidapi).
```

Note that Vendor ID and Product ID are not actually required to open the device. They are used only to filter to a specific device out of the many HID devices you have plugged in. Many library will give you the option to open the device using Product Name or Manufacturer Name instead, `node-hid` being a prime example. This will create issues however for devices with builtin USB Hub or any extra HID interfaces where you will have multiple interfaces with the same name or from the same manufacturer. The Vendor ID together with Product ID create a unique designation to a single interface and will not exhibit this problem. Therefore, even if your library doesn't require you to, it is best to use them to avoid issues.

Unlike Vendor ID and Product ID though, Usage Page and Usage are necessary for successful communication.

> 
> For building a better host with added features, check out [VIA](https://github.com/olivia/via-config).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: No longer exists.

Reviewer 3: VIA is closed-sourced at the moment.
All open code lives under the https://github.com/the-via project.

Author: Nothing in the via repos is useful for this atm.
